---
layout: single
title: A Post-Symposium Report
category: blog
author: James Yeku
---

As the new field builds on the important foundations and gains made by
scholars in the Black DH community in the United states and other parts
of the world, Africa-based scholars and DH practitioners in particular
had occasion at the African DH gathering to bring postcolonial cultural
productions and heritage on the continent into conversation with the
affordances of digital media. The [African Digital Storytelling
Symposium](http://africandh.ku.edu/digital-storytelling-symposium-2020), organized at the University of Kansas on October 8 and 9 in
2020, presented a opportunity to showcase emerging projects and
perspectives in African Digital humanities to an international audience.
The major theme of the symposium was storytelling and its digital
iterations. As Africa's rich storytelling performance tradition is
informing diverse experimentation with digital media hardware and
software, the symposium offered [what Caitlin Tyler-Richards referred to
on Twitter](https://twitter.com/ctredits/status/1314595044045672448) as
a variety of voices and perspectives.

Opening the symposium with a jointly delivered keynote titled ["The
STAYED and the
STOLEN](https://securegrants.neh.gov/publicquery/main.aspx?f=1&gn=HAA-271790-20):
an Immersive Virtual Experience of Cape Coast Castle, Ghana--Humanizing
a History of Horror for Healing" were Kim Gallon and Esther Armah,
whose presentation preceded an opening panel titled "Stories of
Africa-based DH Scholarship." The keynote drew on examples from the
digital study of the Trans-Atlantic Slave trade, along with Armah's
concept of emotional justice, to humanize the horror of slavery through
immersive and interactive VR technologies. The strength of the keynote
was the collaborative form that led to a dialogue between the two
speakers who concluded with some generative reflections on how the
legacies of the Trans-Atlantic slave trade should provoke more
connections and community, rather than tensions, between Africa and the
African Diaspora in North America.

The first panel of the symposium started with a presentation on teaching
and doing digital humanities in Ghana by Kwabena Opoku-Agyemang.
Opoku-Agyemang, whose work in DH focuses on electronic literature and
gaming, suggested that technology has always co-existed with literature
in Africa and the digital essentially consolidates that entanglement.
Following Opoku-Agyemang was Ama-Bemma Adwetewa-Badu (from Cornell
University), who spoke on "Narrating the [Global Poetics
Project](https://globalpoetics.org/)" based on her database of
post-1960s poetry. Adwetewa-Badu stresses the ways in which cultural
memory is no longer relegated to the realm of oral storytelling or mass
media, since what people remember today might derive from what is
searchable, what we can Google. The next speaker was Kọ́lá Túbọ̀sún,
director of [a multimedia project](https://www.yorubaname.com/about-us)
that preserves and documents Yorùbá names. Túbọ̀sún's presentation was
titled "Indigenous Language and Digital Technologies," a popular theme
in several African DH conversations. The final talk for the day was by
Chao Tayiana of the [African Digital
Heritage](https://africandigitalheritage.com/team/) project. Tayiana
explores Kenyan heritage through new media. Some of her current projects
include visualization narratives and heritage that include the mapping
of detention camps in colonial Kenya, as well as the Mau Mau
anti-colonial struggle.

The second day of the symposium deepened the conversation from the
previous day, with a single panel titled "Stories of African Platforms
and Digital Objects/Projects" and a closing conversation on open access
and digital storytelling between Iryna Kuchma of EIFL, a not-for-profit
organization that works with libraries to enable access to knowledge in
developing and transition economy countries in Africa and elsewhere, and
Titi Babalola, PhD student at the University of Toronto. Presenters on
the second panel included Ainehi Edoro, founder of the literary platform
[BrittlePaper](https://brittlepaper.com/); Jayne Batzofin and Sanjin
Muftic of [Reimagining Tragedy in Africa and the Global
South](https://esat.sun.ac.za/index.php/Re-imagining_Tragedy_from_Africa_and_the_Global_South);
Bayo Puddicombe, co-founder and developer, [Chopup
Games](https://www.chopup.me/), and Shola Adenekan of the University of
Amsterdam.

Edoro's talk, "Achebe, Etcetera: Building a Literary Archive One
Instagram Post at a Time," tackles the question of an African literary
archive on social media. She uses mentions and references to African
novelist Chinua Achebe to develop what she called an "etcetera archive"
that is built in bits and pieces and constitutes a catalogic
imagination, Edoro's coinage for "the process of creating knowledge by
fragmentating, and miscelanizing, and representing life and ideas in an
unruly accumulation." Batzofin and Muftic's presentation "The Archive as
Storyteller," underscores the importance of ethical collaboration and
demonstrates the role of the Omeka digital publishing platform in
digital archiving and documenting of the various production labors and
processes involved in staging theatrical performances. While
Puddicombe's "African Narratives and Video Games" stressed the
importance of their gaming platform, Chopup, in telling African stories
in the context of the mobile-phone revolution in Africa, Adenekan closed
the panel by providing an account of his new book, [African Literature
in a Digital
Age](https://boydellandbrewer.com/9781847012388/african-literature-in-the-digital-age/),
the first major volume on literary digital humanities in Africa.

The final session of the symposium---the closing conversation on open
access and digital storytelling between Kuchma and Babalola---captured
the important question of digital access, a theme that is sometimes
invoked in digital discourses on Africa to conceal the many exciting and
robust digital initiatives currently evident in places such as Lagos and
Nairobi. Babalola encouraged more work opportunities for collaborations
in African DH, insisting on the need to create a community of African
Digital Humanities scholars to support each other, to create
partnerships, to contribute, to subscribe, to continue shaping DH in
Africa.

Organized by the team of James Yeku, Brian Rosenblum, Sylvia Fernández,
and Kaylen Dwyer, the symposium was sponsored and promoted by KU'S
Center for African Studies and the Institute for Digital Research in the
Humanities, along with the University of Lagos Center for Digital
Humanties, Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH), and
EIFL---Electronic Information for Libraries, and registered about 200
participants from different parts of the world. Video recordings of all
the presentations and panels can be found here: 
[Day 1](https://youtu.be/Y53YiyfAqeo) | [Day 2](https://youtu.be/Unm9IJjCTNk).
